The mechanical engineer shall, in the practice of his profession, be governed by the Golden Rule, the ideals of service to man and his environment, and the indispensability of unwavering public confidence in his professional competence, integrity and humanity.
The mechanical engineer shall maintain the proper pride for his profession, observe the standards of professional practice, safeguard the dignity, welfare, and reputation of his colleagues in the professions, and fulfill his duties and obligations as a citizen of the Republic of the Philippines.
The mechanical engineer shall update and enhance constantly his professional knowledge and skills through assiduous research and study, and meaningful participation in continuing education programs and seminars conducted or authorized by the Philippine Society of Mechanical Engineers or educational institutions supervised by the State.
The ethical principle governing the mechanical engineer applies equally to partnerships, firms and entities organized and existing for the practice of mechanical engineering.
The mechanical engineer shall honor and respect the supreme authority of the State, the Rule of Law, the primacy of the general welfare, the fundamental rights of persons, and the obligations and privileges of citizens recognized and guaranteed by the Constitution of the Philippines.
He shall cooperate fully with the State in the pursuit of national development plans and programs, the inviolability of national security, the promotion of peace, and the prevention and/or prosecution of unjust, criminal or unlawful acts and omissions.
He shall be ready to render the services needed for the adequate and orderly development of the resources of the country, and to offer his mechanical devices and inventions essential or necessary for national defense.
In a national emergency, he shall offer his professional knowledge, skill and experience in the service of the State.
The mechanical engineer shall be well-informed of the latest technological progress in his own line of work. He shall encourage and require the use, or application of standard mechanical equipment, machinery, or processes for safety, economy and efficiency.
Whenever he designs a mechanical equipment, machinery or process, or prepares the layout of a project, he must apply an adequate factor of safety, and provide for the necessary leeway for proper operating and maintenance conditions.
When he discovers faulty or unsafe devices, equipment, or machinery in any place, work or plant, he shall without delay, give notice thereof to the proper authority, public or private, for the immediate and effective correction, regardless of whether or not he is responsible for said place, work or plant.
The mechanical engineer shall recognize labor as one of the major resources of our country. He must acknowledge that a working man is not a mechanical robot but a human being.
He shall be familiar with the State policies on Labor and Social Justice, as well as labor and social legislation and shall observe faithfully these policies and laws in his dealings with labor in general, and with his workmen in particular.
He shall strive to improve the skills of his workmen, pay them a fair living wage, and instruct them on how to prevent accidents in their place of work.
The mechanical engineer shall observe punctuality in his appointments, perform honestly and in good faith his contractual obligation and his duties and obligations to his client or employer, and observe fair dealing in his relations with his clients and employers.
He shall treat with confidentiality any information obtained by him as to the business affairs and technical methods or processes of a client or employer.
He shall inform his client or employer of his business connections, interests, or affiliations which may influence his judgment, or impair the quality or character of his services.
The mechanical engineer is entitled to a just and fair compensation for his services. In the computation of such compensation, the period of time consumed, his knowledge, skill, experience, and reputation, and the depreciation of instruments and materials used, shall be considered and accorded such weight as is just and reasonable.
He shall accept compensation, financial or otherwise, for his services from his client or employer only. He may agree to, or receive compensation from any other source only with the full knowledge and consent of all parties concerned.
The mechanical engineer shall be completely above suspicion or reproach in his relation with his clients or employers, avoiding the remotest reference or relation to any secret or questionable agreement on commissions or other financial considerations promised by or received from any person or entity other than his client or employer.
To thane own self be true and thou cannot be false to any man - expresses the duty which a mechanical engineer owes to himself and to others.
The mechanical engineer shall use only fair means to gain professional advancement. In the pursuit thereof he shall not injure the work or employment opportunities of others or use any improper or questionable method of soliciting employment or clientele.
He shall refrain from association with, or allowing the use of his name by, any person or entity of questionable reputation.
He shall provide the opportunity and the means to improve and advance the knowledge, skills, and experience of his colleagues and associates.
He shall define clearly the line of authority and scope of responsibility of his associates and assistants. Orders, or the recall thereof, shall be issued through proper channels.
He shall be receptive to new ideas and suggestions from others, and ready to recognize, encourage, and accredit the authors thereof. Suggestions from colleagues and associates shall be given more careful attention.
He shall use tact and discretion in dealing with his colleagues and associates, but not at the sacrifice of firmness. He shall work out difficult problems with courage and serenity.
Careful selection of understudies shall be a guiding principle, and preference shall be given to those with adequate engineering education.
He shall not expect others to face danger that he himself will not face. He shall observe at all times safety requirements for the protection of all concerned.
The mechanical engineer shall actively support the duly accredited association with the end in view of enhancing the practice of the profession and discharging his public responsibilities as professional.
Violation of any provision of this code, which causes damage or injury to another, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Two hundred Pesos (P200.00), or an imprisonment for not more than (2)months, or both, at the discretion of the Court.
Violation of any provision of this Code shall likewise constitute unethical, unprofessional and dishonorable conduct, and shall be dealt with under the provisions of Sec. 42 of the Mechanical Engineering Act, R.A. No. 8495.
This Code shall take effect after approval by the Professional Regulation Commission and after fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette.